Story Recapped here.
Today, I'm going to explain a horror, sci-fi,
thriller film called “Existenz.”
Spoilers ahead!
Watch out and take care.
Ted is an intern at Antenna Research, the
world’s leading game manufacturer.
He’s manning the door at a game developer
conference where a small crowd is gathered
at what appears to be a small church.
Antenna’s renowned game designer, Allegra
Geller, introduces her latest creation.
The crowd listens excitedly as Allegra discusses
her new game, Existenz, and how it would be
the next groundbreaking game of the decade.
Players would plug into their consoles, called
game pods, and enter a virtual-reality world.
The consoles they use appear to be made of
organic material that looks like a blob of
flesh.
These are then plugged into their bodies at
the base of their spines via an umbilical
cord, also made of flesh.
Several audience members are then selected
to join Allegra in Existenz.
A tardy audience member arrives, and Ted checks
his belongings using a metal detector for
any concealed weapons or recording equipment.
He comes out clean, and he then joins the
audience.
The volunteers and Allegra then enter Existenz,
going into a dream-like state.
The newly-arrived audience member suddenly
stands up and points a gun at Allegra.
He walks up to her, proclaiming he would end
Allegra Geller, calling her a demoness.
He shoots but only hits Allegra’s shoulder.
The crowd scrambles and other security officers
draw their guns and shoot the man repeatedly.
Ted sees the man’s gun, noticing that it
looks as if it had been made out of bone and
ligaments.
Regardless, he arms himself with it and runs
to Allegra, escorting her out.
They get into a car and drive into the countryside.
Ted asks Allegra if she knows what to do,
and Allegra says she didn’t even know people
wanted her dead.
Allegra says the countryside is full of game
developers, and Ted finds hope, saying someone
could help them.
Ted gets a phone call from Antenna, but Allegra
grabs his phone and throws it out the window,
saying whoever wants her dead could track
their location through his phone.
Allegra thinks they’d be better off remaining
in hiding as they don’t know who they could
trust.
They pull over to the side of the road, and
Ted tries removing the bullet in Allegra’s
shoulder.
He fishes out the projectile and sees that
it wasn’t a bullet that penetrated her but
a tooth.
They take a look at the strange bone pistol
again and see that the bullets in the magazine
are teeth.
Ted notes that the gun is made entirely out
of organic material, the perfect weapon for
evading a metal detector.
They arrive at a motel, and Allegra walks
up to Ted and tries to feel up his back, looking
for Ted’s bio port.
The bio port is a hole at the base of the
spine where the game pod’s umbilical cord
connects to.
Ted says he never got a bio port installed.
Allegra is surprised and realizes Ted must
have never played any virtual reality games
his whole life since he doesn’t have a bio
port.
Ted says he doesn’t like the feeling of
having something penetrating his body.
Allegra says having bio ports installed is
safe and straightforward, citing how people
even do it in malls, but Ted counters, saying
there’s also a chance of permanent spinal
paralysis.
Allegra laughs this off, telling Ted he’s
missing out on a lot.
Allegra then takes her game pod and tells
Ted it had been damaged during the panic at
the church.
She says she needs to enter the game as soon
as possible to see if it has been corrupted.
She would need the help of another individual
to enter the game with her to see if the game
still works.
Ted agrees, and they head to a gas station
to have an illegal bio port inserted in him.
At the gas station, they meet the attendant,
Gas, who recognizes Allegra and decides to
help.
Gas confesses that Allegra’s games have
changed his life by providing him an escape
from the mundaneness.
Ted and Gas head in while Allegra looks around
outside.
She then sees a strange two-headed mutated
creature, admiring it and caressing it.
She heads back inside and sees Ted keeping
Gas at bay, afraid to have the bio port installed.
Allegra steps in, trying to convince Ted to
proceed.
As she tries to talk Ted into it, Gas shoots
Ted with the port installer, causing Ted to
fall on his face.
Ted panics, saying he can’t feel his legs,
but Gas calms him down, saying it’s only
temporary.
Allegra is excited to enter the game and plugs
the game pod’s umbilical cords into herself
and Ted.
She turns the game pod on, but the pod sparks
and short circuits.
Allegra is infuriated, blaming Ted for destroying
her pod, but Ted argues he did nothing wrong.
He didn’t feel anything, nor did he do anything
to influence the pod.
Nevertheless, Allegra is distraught, saying
her pod is the sole game pod that contains
the only copy of Existenz.
She poured years of her life and millions
of dollars developing the game, and now it’s
stuck inside a defective game pod.
Ted apologizes but tells her that he didn’t
do anything wrong, maintaining he felt nothing
from when she turned the pod on.
Gas then walks in, agreeing with Ted while
pointing a shotgun at them.
Gas reveals a five million dollar bounty on
Allegra’s head, and he’s keen on collecting
the reward for himself.
He also reveals that he had intentionally
installed a defective bio port into Ted to
short out the game as there’s also a reward
for destroying Existenz.
Allegra tries to dissuade Gas, saying the
people who want her dead would never pay him
the money and could even kill him too.
Ted then grabs the bio port installer and
shoots Gas through the neck.
Gas falls to the floor, lifeless.
After two close calls with assassins, Allegra
decides to visit Kiri Vinokur, a game pod
engineer.
Ted spots the same two-headed creature, and
Allegra says it’s probably a mutated salamander
frog lizard thing.
They both shrug it off and enter Kiri’s
cabin.
Kiri welcomes them in and tells Allegra he’s
heard of the rumors surrounding Allegra’s
bounty and assures them they’ll be safe
in his house.
Allegra hands Kiri her shorted-out game pod,
and Kiri begins work on it.
Kiri and his assistant assess the game pod’s
condition meticulously while Ted watches.
Ted notes that the game pod looks like an
animal, and Kiri laughs, saying the game pods
might as well be animals.
They are created from special tissue grown
from genetically modified amphibians and mixed
with synthetic D.N.A.
Kiri repairs Allegra’s pod successfully,
noting how lucky she is, seeing how the game
doesn’t seem to be corrupted.
Kiri then replaces Ted’s bio port and inserts
a functioning one.
Allegra and Ted head back to the motel, and
they finally plug back into Allegra’s game
pod.
Almost instantly, they’re transported into
Existenz.
Ted is in awe, being inside a virtual reality
game for the first time.
Ted asks how they’re supposed to play and
what the objectives are, but Allegra tells
him they have to play the game to find out.
They look around and find a smaller version
of the game pod, a micro pod.
A store owner, Nader, tells them the micro
pod is a brand new gaming architecture from
Cortical Systematics, Antenna’s equivalent
in-game.
They follow Nader to a secluded area, and
Ted suddenly gets intimidating and is taken
aback by his sudden urge to be mean.
Allegra tells him it’s part of the game
as the game would sometimes make them do or
say things their characters are supposed to.
Ted continues, and Nader recommends they use
the micro pods.
Nader leaves, and Allegra comments that Nader’s
interactions are a little lacking, making
a note to rework him.
They use the micro pods, and as Ted inserts
the micro pod into Allegra, he kisses Allegra’s
bio port.
Allegra pushes him back, and Ted says it wasn’t
him but his game character.
Allegra then kisses Ted, and the two start
making out.
Allegra assumes it must be part of their character’s
stories.
Ted tries to stop, worried about his physical
body.
Allegra assures him that their bodies are
fine, and they’d get pulled out of the game
if anything were to go wrong.
They continue kissing, and Ted suddenly finds
himself in a filthy warehouse filled with
bloody conveyor belts, workers lined on all
sides busy disemboweling mutated amphibians.
A game character, Nourish, tells Ted they’re
at a trout farm, farming all kinds of creatures
and creating parts for game pods.
Ted slices an amphibian open and starts separating
its guts.
Even he is surprised at the level of skill
mastery he has and assumes it’s his character’s
skills.
Nourish then recommends Ted have lunch at
a Chinese restaurant nearby and order the
special.
Ted agrees and heads down to look for Allegra.
He finds Allegra and commends her game design,
saying the factory looks dirty and grotesque,
looking as close to the real thing as possible.
They head into the Chinese restaurant and
tell the waiter they want the special.
Ted tells Allegra he wants to pause the game,
but Allegra is surprised, asking Ted if he’s
not curious to find out more about the special.
Ted says he’s afraid he might lose touch
with reality, but Allegra says this is only
an effect of how well the game integrates
with his brain.
Ted suddenly stands up, shouts pause, and
exits the game.
They both awaken at the motel, and Allegra
says she wants to go back into the game immediately,
where there is intrigue and suspense.
Ted is terrified, saying the reality they
returned to is indistinguishable from the
game world, making him wonder if they’re
still inside a game without knowing.
Allegra kisses Ted, reassuring him that she’s
real, and they agree to go back into the game.
The waiter returns, bringing the special,
a large plate filled with all sorts of amphibians
and reptiles, all mixed in a soup.
Ted sees the two-headed creature they saw
in the real world and gets the sudden urge
to eat everything on the plate.
Both are disgusted, but Ted, unable to control
his actions, continues eating happily.
He eats the flesh and skin off of the amphibians,
leaving the bones.
He starts assembling the bones, clicking them
together until he forms the same bone pistol
they found on Allegra’s assailant.
Ted takes a tooth bridge from his mouth and
places it in as the gun’s ammunition.
He suddenly aims the weapon at Allegra’s
head, looking as if he’s ready to pull the
trigger, proclaiming death to the demoness.
He stops himself, and Allegra passes it off
as a joke but is visibly shaken.
Ted apologizes and admits he has the urge
to kill someone, pointing to the waiter.
The waiter approaches their table, and Ted
shoots.
The waiter tries to fight back, but Ted fires
again, destroying half of the man’s face.
Everyone in the restaurant is stunned, but
Ted assures them everything is fine and tells
them to continue their meals.
The crowd complies and continues their lunches
as if nothing happened.
A dog picks up the bone gun and carries it
away.
Nourish appears and gestures for them to follow.
Nourish congratulates them for killing the
waiter, revealing that the waiter was a spy
for Cortical Systematics.
Nourish then tells them he’s part of an
underground organization called the Realists,
a group dedicated to destroying Cortical Systematics
for the crimes they’ve committed against
reality.
He then tells them they must continue working
in the company as they need more agents on
the inside.
Ted and Allegra return to the game store looking
for Nader, but a different man, Hugo, is operating
the cash register.
Hugo leads them back, showing a dead Nader.
Hugo shows them the bone gun that the Chinese
waiter’s dog had brought him.
He reveals that the Chinese waiter was a Realist
member, and Nourish and Nader are the spies
working for Cortical Systems.
Nader had known about Ted and Allegra’s
arrival and had successfully gotten them to
assassinate their supposed contact to the
Realist movement.
Hugo then tasks them to head back to the factory
to eliminate Nourish.
They return to the trout farm and find a mangled
rotting game pod, and Allegra says she has
the urge to plug herself in.
Ted warns the pod looks diseased, but Allegra
dismisses him, plugging the pod into her.
She turns the pod on and suddenly starts feeling
pain.
Ted cuts the umbilical cord, and Allegra starts
bleeding out.
Nourish steps in with a flamethrower and burns
the diseased pod, proclaiming death to realism.
The pod bursts open, and a massive amount
of spores fill the air, infecting all the
game pod parts in the factory.
Allegra then stabs Nourish, and Nourish declares
death to the demoness before falling.
The flamethrower starts burning the building,
and Ted and Allegra wake up safely back at
the motel.
Allegra says they’ve somehow brought the
disease back with them from Existenz, and
it has now infected her game pod.
Allegra tries remedying it by injecting medicine
and notices Ted scratching his bio port.
She examines Ted’s bio port and realizes
this is Kiri’s doing.
Allegra surmises Kiri must have given Ted
an infected bio port, knowing Ted would plug
into Allegra’s pod, infecting it.
Ted starts panicking, knowing he has an infected
bio port, but Allegra takes action, inserting
a plug into Ted’s bio port to stop the infection.
An explosion occurs, and Hugo from the game
appears sporting camo pants and a firearm.
Hugo shoots the pod, and Ted tells Allegra
he thinks they’re still in the game.
They all rush out into a warzone with explosions
and gunfire everywhere.
Hugo tells them this is the Realist uprising,
and they are here to stop Existenz and Antenna.
Hugo aims the gun at Allegra, but Kiri shoots
him.
Ted and Allegra are in utter confusion, unsure
if they’ve exited the game or are still
inside.
Kiri runs to them with the bone gun in hand
and tells them he made a copy of the game.
He had replicated it during the surgery.
He then tells Allegra to join him in defecting
to Cortical Systematics, joining others from
Antenna, but Allegra picks up Hugo’s gun
and shoots Kiri.
Ted gets angry, taking the gun from Allegra,
but Allegra tells him Kiri was only a game
character, and she didn’t like how he was
confusing her.
But Ted is concerned that they might no longer
be in the game, and Allegra may have killed
Kiri in real life.
Ted then points the gun at Allegra, telling
her that their ending up together was no accident.
Allegra realizes Ted is part of the Realist
movement all along, remembering how he didn’t
have a bio port installed.
Ted confirms this, saying he only got the
bio port to get closer to Allegra, to understand
the person he intended to kill.
Allegra then reveals she had suspected Ted
to be her true assassin when he aimed the
bone gun at her back at the restaurant.
The plug she inserted in his bio port is a
bomb, and she detonates it, blowing up Ted’s
spine.
Allegra celebrates, saying she’s won the
game.
Attachments suddenly appear on her head and
hand, and before she knows it, she awakens
back at the church with a group of volunteers.
Characters in the game like the waiter, Kiri,
Nader, Gas, Hugo, and Nourish are all present
as volunteers.
Nourish is revealed to be the game’s designer,
and Ted and Allegra are audience members who
are also volunteers.
The volunteers then share comments, criticisms,
and ideas about the game, Trancendenz.
Some give praise, others recall funny moments
and laugh, and others express their excitement
for the game’s development.
The volunteers all applaud Nourish and Nourish
and his assistant step aside to talk about
the game.
Nourish expresses his concern that he’s
terrified of the game they just played, having
concepts like assassinating a famous game
designer, obviously a reference to him.
Nourish suspects that the game may have picked
up some of the volunteer’s inner thoughts,
thinking that one of them could want him dead.
Ted and Allegra take their dog and approach
Nourish, telling Nourish his game design is
nothing like they’ve ever seen before, concluding
that Nourish is indeed the greatest game designer
in the world.
Ted then congratulates Nourish for being reality’s
greatest enemy.
Ted and Allegra take guns out concealed on
the dog and start firing at Nourish and the
assistant.
They fall to the floor, and Ted and Allegra
shout death to the demon Nourish and death
to Trancendenz.
They then make their way to the door, aiming
their guns at the man who played the waiter.
He begs them not to shoot then asks if they’re
still playing a game.
Ted and Allegra stare at him, puzzled, but
don’t answer.